We will now demonstrate how
CrateDB is far more than a pure
time series database supporting
time series but also JSON,
Geospatial, Vectors and Full-Text
Search.
There will be a demonstration of
standard SQL and how the
different data types can be
queried.
Examples mainly based on a
weather data support this claim
like full-text search across
textual attributes or user-
generated comments over time.
We will start with time series
data which follows a simple
relational representation in
CrateDB.
The distinguishing
characteristics of time series
data include timestamped
records and are typically append
only.
Consider a table named weather
data.
In this table we have columns
for timestamp, location,
temperature and humidity.
The humidity should also
automatically be checked to be
non negative.
The primary key is a combination
of ts and location.
We also want to use a dynamic
column policy that means to
automatically add new columns at
runtime.
Now let's see how we can insert
data into this table.
The INSERT INTO command is used
to insert a record with a
timestamp, location, temperature
and humidity values for San
Francisco and we can view the
data in our table using a SELECT
command.
Now let's say we want to add a
new column wind speed to our
table.
Because we have set the column
policy to dynamic, we can add
this new column directly through
an INSERT INTO command.
This new column will be
automatically added to our
table.
We can view the updated data in
our table using the SELECT
command.
The new column is automatically
indexed, so running a search
query will be efficient even
across large data volumes.
CrateDB offers support for
JSON.
JSON is a commonly used format
for data exchange, making it
ideal for importing and
exporting time series data.
It also allows for the storage
of arbitrary contextual data,
providing additional details
that can easily be appended to
any time series data set.
This added context can often
prove helpful when analyzing
patterns and trends.
The object data type in CrateDB
allows for a strict, dynamic or
ignored schema depending on the
specific use case.
This means you can insert JSON
directly as a string and any new
attributes will be automatically
indexed.
This combination of flexibility
and power makes CrateDB an
excellent choice for managing
time series data.
In this example, we further
enhance our weather data table
by adding contextual data.
We use the ALTER TABLE command
to add a new column, sensor
description of type OBJECT
dynamic to store JSON data.
This allows us to include
additional details like quality
of measurement and battery life
of the sensor.
We then insert a record with
these new attributes into the
table.
CrateDB's dynamic schema allows
us to immediately run a query to
find devices with low battery.
The SELECT statement identifies
distinct locations where the
battery life from the sensor
description is less than 40.
To use JSON data for time
series directly, we create a new
table called weather_data_json
with columns for timestamp,
location, and vals which is of
type object.
We then insert a record into the
table with a timestamp,
location, and values for
temperature and humidity in
JSON format.
Using a SELECT command, we can
view the data in our table.
We can also add more attributes
to our JSON data on the fly,
such as wind speed, by simply
including it in the INSERT INTO
statement.
The updated data, including the
new wind speed attribute, can be
viewed and filtered by
immediately.
In addition to numerical and
categorical data, CrateDB is
also highly effective in
handling text data.
This could include attributes
such as machine status, user
comments, or log files which can
be valuable sources of
information for analysis.
Furthermore, CrateDB is
equipped with robust full text
search capabilities.
This allows for efficient
searching through these text
data not just for exact matches,
but also for typos or specific
phrases and even synonyms.
With CrateDB, you can
efficiently perform a full text
search through your data and
extract the insights you need.
Let us have a look at a table
for web server logs.
It contains a timestamp, IP
address, request method, the
called http://endpoint, a
response status and the user
agent.
We insert a few rows to the home,
login and products endpoints.
Imagine users can type search
criteria that will be used in
the queries.
Instead of typing the word home.
two letters are mixed up.
The fuzzy search capabilities in
CrateDB can easily cope with
these misspellings.
This query uses a fuzziness of
five, which means there can be
Levenshtein distance of five
or five letters that are allowed
to be different in the search
term and the actual term in the
database.
Of course, full text search can
be combined with other
attributes as well.
For example, all successful HTTP
calls to the home endpoint can
be found by adding the condition
of response status equals 200.
There are many more options
available.
Please refer to the CrateDB
documentation for all the
details on full text search.
CrateDB supports the float
vector data type for columns
which is ideal for storing
floating point vectors.
This data type can handle up to
2048 dimensions, accommodating a
wide array of data complexities.
To efficiently index these
vectors, CrateDB utilizes A
Hierarchical Navigable Small
World graph, an efficient index
for searching similar vectors in
high dimensional spaces.
An approximate k-Nearest
Neighbor Search can be done with
the knn match function based on
an Euclidean distance function.
This combination of features
enhances CrateDB's ability to
handle complex multidimensional
data.
The knn match can be
combined with other conditions
as well.
Vectors are very prominent
nowadays when it comes to
semantic search, where we also
see a big area of application.
In this example, we focus on
finding similar patterns as a
common problem in time series
analysis.
Although there are multiple
different ways to identify
similar patterns, executing a
similarity search on a vector is
a viable solution.
One could create vectors of
various different features like
minimum or maximum values,
moving averages et cetera.
In our example, we want to find
weeks with similar temperature
patterns.
Therefore, we create a table
called weather_patterns_weekly
that stores the location, the
particular week, and the maximum
temperatures of every single day
in a vector.
To populate this table, we
aggregate the temperature values
of our weather data table in the
following way.
The common table expression of
this statement truncates the
date of measurements to weeks
and days and calculates the
maximum temperature per
location, week and day.
The outer SELECT statement
groups the data by location and
week to aggregate the daily
maximum values into a float
vector.
The resulting data is inserted
into the weather patterns weekly
table.
As we can see, the result
contains a vector of daily
temperatures per location and
week.
In order to find similar weeks,
we execute a k-nearest neighbor
search for the week of 20th
February 2023 represented by the
given time stamp.
In order to do so, we select the
temperature pattern of the week
of interest, execute a
similarity search on the
temperature pattern and want to
find the top 10 most similar
weeks.
The score value represents the
similarity.
Please note that this value is
not the actual distance of
vectors, but an arbitrary value
to rank the results.
For more details on the score
value, please refer to the CrateDB
documentation.
The results provide us with
various weeks that have similar
temperature patterns.
If we look at a visualization of
the similar data sets, we can
see that the weekly temperature
patterns look similar to each
other.
Obviously this example is very
simple and for a real comparison
of patterns we should do a
proper normalization of data
first.
Still, it shows how the
similarity search can be used to
detect patterns.
The vector search can be used
for a lot of different cases,
especially when creating
embeddings of textual data,
videos, audio files or other
binaries.
This is not part of this course.
Please refer to the CrateDB
documentation and other
tutorials, for example, about
CrateDB's Lang chain
integration on how to work with
large language models.
Geospatial data plays a critical
role in time series solutions,
offering a spatial context to
the timestamp data.
This data type allows us to
track changes over time in a
particular geographic area,
which can be vital for numerous
applications.
For example, in the
transportation industry,
geospatial data can help track
vehicle routes and monitor
traffic conditions over time.
In environmental studies, it can
be used to monitor changes in
weather patterns or wildlife
movements.
By integrating geospatial data
into time series analysis, we
can uncover spatial trends and
patterns, enhancing our
understanding and enabling more
informed decision making.
For this introduction, let us
create a simple table for the
cities that are referenced in
the weather data.
We want to insert a few rows
into the new table.
Selecting this data shows that
Create DB interprets the data
correctly and for example opens
the coordinates on Open Street
Map when clicking on the arrow
icon.
The geospatial data can now be
used for example to visualize
weather conditions on a map or
automatically figure out if
storm events will cross a
certain country that is defined
via its Geo shape.
All of it can be done via the
available functions to query
geodata directly in Create DB.
Binary, Large Object or BLOB is
another key data type that can
be effectively managed in time
series solutions.
This type of data can range from
images and audio files to logs
or even serialized machine
learning models.
Storing and retrieving BLOB data
efficiently is crucial in many
times series applications,
especially when dealing with
multimedia content or large log
files.
CrateDB supports BLOB storage
allowing users to store and
retrieve binary data
efficiently, making it an
excellent choice for managing
complex time series data with
various data types.
They are stored in separate
tables which allows for
different disk configurations
than the regular database.
Files upload and download can be
executed via the HTTP interface
of CrateDB.
All metadata of binaries is
available via SQL.
As an alternative, binaries can
also be stored in text columns
using a base 64 encoding.
This closes our overview of how
CrateDB handles various data
types that are relevant for
comprehensive time series data
management.